[ Inaudible ]
>> And Victor is kind of giving you a welcome on behalf
of the family and he would like to know
where everybody is coming from.
So I point to you, you tell us where you're coming from.
[ Foreign Language ]
>> Colombia.
>> Antioquia.
[ Foreign Language ]
>> Ecuador.
>> Jamaica.
Russia and Netherlands
Thailand
Czech Republic
Republic of Czech Republic
United States
Hawaii
Yes, there is Quindío and Houston, don't mix them up
I'm also from here, Colombia, also from Antioquia
From the United States
Also from the United States
Also
Honduras
Ecuador
(laughing)
(speaking in foreign language)
I don't know if you have been told a little bit about what you are doing here.
No, we just came.
Well, we want you to tell us.
Well, you are cordially invited to come.
We are going to walk around a part of the farm
to get to know the different coffee processes and also the stages.
So we are going to start from the plantation
to the roasted coffee.
So he is going to give us a tour.
from here walking up to their farm so we can get to know the coffee and then we're going
to come back and he's going to show you they have a beneficio here and they also have a
little roasting.
[ Foreign Language ]
So Humberto's a farmer.
He takes care of the plants and the trees,
and his sons take care of the processing.
So the two youngest are the ones who know all
about the processing.
(speaking in foreign language)
- So they're 14 and 16.
Yeah, they've just been in the last two years
processing coffee.
(speaking in foreign language)
- Anybody's first time to a farm at all, a coffee farm?
Taking a walk and chat.
It's a short commute.
May lady threw stones at him.
(people chattering)
[Footsteps]
[ Background noise ]
(people chattering)
(laughing)
(laughter)
[INAUDIBLE]
[inaudible]
I think we should have recorded some songs.
I don't know if we're going to record anything.
I heard that there is a good walkway around here, but I don't know where it is.
I think it's good too.
[INAUDIBLE]
(people chattering)
(indistinct chatter)
[ Indistinct conversations ]
[inaudible]
[ Inaudible ]
[ Background noise ]
>> Actually, Colombia has the biggest biodiversity of birds.
>> Really?
>> Wow.
>> Because there are so many different planets.
yeah
(people chattering)
yes
[BLANK_AUDIO]
(applause)
[ Background noise ]
- It's a coffee tree. - Okay.
- Mm-hmm.
You said this is your first time to a farm?
- It's about two hours. - Have you seen coffee trees,
like in photos and things?
- I have a few, but I have one that's like 18.
- Yeah, yeah, nice.
Does it ever produce?
- It does when I put it under grow lights.
- Nice. - Oh yeah?
- But it's more spindly. - Yeah, right.
- Kind of like windows. - Uh-huh.
- But it goes up to the ceiling, so.
- Wow.
That's super cool.
I brought a coffee plant back from Brazil one time,
and I just couldn't keep it alive.
I was living in Denver and then moved to Minneapolis.
Even with heat in the house, it was too cold.
- Well, that's, mine's so spindly,
and it just has, it looks not as healthy
as another one that I left at my mother's,
'cause I've had mine since I was in college.
And hers is nice, bushy, full,
super healthy because it's never moved.
Whereas mine's moved through so many Midwest winters
and I lost, like I had others that I lost through travels,
but this is the one that stuck through.
- Yeah.
- Out of curiosity, I just recently got one from,
is it Grange Coffee or whatnot in California?
Since they're selling their tools.
I was like, "Oh, I get one that's from there."
- Did you talk to Jay?
- No, I just ordered it online.
I don't know.
- How you work with them up there, Lucia?
- Yeah, I did.
- Um, it's been a long time, it was like 2015.
- Yeah.
I suppose UC Davis.
- Well, I was living in San Diego, so I was pretty close
to being able to visit Jane.
- Yeah.
- Good land.
Before it was fringe.
- There was just good land organics.
- Oh, it's like already like three degrees cooler.
- Yeah.
You gotta go faster.
Run Nick, run!
So they do bring you to up here, but it's also a lot more uncomfortable.
A bunch of people crowded in the Jeep on these bumpy roads.
You just end up falling over each other.
Just need to earn your dinner.
And work off the last three days of food.
(footsteps)
[footsteps]
[FOOTSTEPS]
[WHISTLE]
[LAUGHTER]
That's the best surprise that I can have.
Halfway there.
Yeah, this is this is what the terrain of
my backyard is.
I think it's just it's got this
and then we've got a few trails that go through,
but I hope to eventually get quite a few more.
But it's like this kind of steepness.
How much land do you have?
8.6 acres. Oh
Like suburbs of Portland. Yeah, we got super lucky. I mean, we're just I mean, we're right
We're technically Portland address in Portland school. So which is great for a 10 year old. So
But yeah, we just the house needed so much work with it. No one else was jumping on it
Almost two years now
We we almost have a working bathroom upstairs
But at least you have a kitchen.
But why not start from a new construction?
Start with new?
We consider that even when we're up in Washington, but
Washington the huge issue was all the good land is taken and all the other land is protected or bought up by the
County Washington government.
Oh so is that a requisite? Like you could have it if you restored?
Excuse me?
If you restored the house? You couldn't just tear it down and build new?
down and build new? I mean the foundation and everything's solid. Like it's not like it new.
It just uh with everything we wanted to do and then we found asbestos in the walls so we just
we ended up gutting it because it's like well we're just going to take everything out and we've
done everything mostly ourselves except for windows and heat. Okay. Um so I mean definitely
it saved us a lot of money compared to building new where we'd have to we'd have to hire out a
lot of that stuff for a construction loan. So it's allowed us to do things. We still thought we'd be
be done by now but or at least closer
but not having to wash dishes outside in winter and you know like you walk
cooking outside too and stuff like that it's a luxury to have a kitchen so like
things slow down a lot once we have the kitchen
(footsteps)
[Breathing]
(exhales)
[Footsteps]
(footsteps)
[indistinct chatter]
I don't know.
It's a bit dark.
It's dark?
It's dark.
We'll have to go through here.
There's a hole in the moss.
We'll come off. I still see it going higher.
Or is it the spot that's back there that everyone stopped at?
We're just overachievers up here.
Oh, avocados!
(leaves rustling)
[leaves rustling]
[laughter]
[birds chirping]
[leaves rustling]
They look beautiful.
[unintelligible]
Maybe a little bit more.
Do you have any contact on how why some are very bushy and others are very secure?
[unclear]
Um, I think it must have to do with age and a lot of the spindly ones.
There are still a lot of abandoned farms here.
People just don't have the resources to take care of them.
So, the spindly ones, they usually just sit there abandoned.
And then these, you can tell this farmer takes a little bit more care of this.
We're actually not on Umbreto, we're just on his back side and back.
Not on this side, so he doesn't have this avocado.
I caught this avocado.
[Laughter]
[Indistinct chatter]
We made it.
(laughing)
(speaking in foreign language)
- Oh yeah.
(laughing)
- Oh wow.
I smell that. You can just smell it.
Wait, what is that?
Oh, what is that?
[Laughter]
Lucia, do you know what city that is?
Santuario, we'll go there.
Well, there's two.
[Indistinct chatter]
such a big field
how long did you weigh up high that time?
like way up in the sun
that's nuts
how can that be possible to have a city like this?
I don't know what time it was
(laughter)
it's beautiful though
I mean I'd live there
[ Background noise ]
[Spanish]
Caturra.
You can say the size of the leaf.
So you can identify it by the size of the leaf and the corrugated edges.
Kind of like a...
Maybe.
[Spanish]
We drive through Castillo Rosario, Colombia and we are in the process of getting a gage.
I was just explaining to some colleagues that the lot that was in the main highway, the lot that was up there, was a gage lot.
Here we are at an altitude of 1,600 meters.
And at the highest point, up there, at 1,650 meters.
We are at the level of the atoll.
Can you ask what all varieties he has?
Yeah, so he has the Catura, the red and the yellow Catura.
Oh, okay.
And then he also has a variety called Columbia.
Mm-hmm.
And on the way up, we passed one of their Geisha flots.
Oh, oh.
So they have Geisha.
Mm-hmm.
Nice.
You can ask him on the way down and he'll point it out.
(laughing)
[SOUND]
(speaking in foreign language)
because of the conditions that the height offers.
In the lower parts, which are the valleys,
or in other countries like Brazil,
where the Arabica coffee is also grown,
they also grow robusta coffee,
which is a tree that grows higher,
with grains that differ in texture.
Let's say that the Arabica coffee has a longer texture,
[Spanish]
So he's saying that at this altitude, so we're at 1,600 feet, the top of their farm goes to 1,600 meters.
And the top of the farm goes to 1,650. We're about the same height as the town of Santuario.
I think because of the cooler climate and the lower temperatures, this is all Arabica
kind of region.
So, as we know, the Robusta has grown in much lower elevations.
So up here, that's all you'll find.
(speaking in foreign language)
After the beans germinate, it takes about 50 days,
about a month and a half, two months,
to obtain what we call chapola.
And then we get another two months to get what is called coffee of almacigo.
And from there, from where the coffee is taken to the plantation site,
It takes about two years to get the first fruit of harvest.
Where's John Marco?
Yes, please.
I want to save my voice.
Sorry.
I could translate, but I didn't pay as much attention as I should.
When the grain starts to germinate, it takes about two months, a month and a half to get what we call chapola.
Chapola, I don't know what that is.
Chapola.
That's like the baby plant.
Seedling? Chapling?
Seedling.
[inaudible]
When they plant, it takes two months to become a chapola.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
50 days.
Two more months to get café almasigo.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
So at least four months before planting,
and once you plant is at least two years
before you harvest.
- It's pretty fast.
(speaking in foreign language)
- Yes. - Yes.
- The first fruit starts in 18 months, but they harvest in two years.
We entered the field here to look at the field.
- How old are the plants? How old are they?
- These are three years old.
- Three years old.
- Well, that was at the beginning of the pandemic.
It was in the 2000...
- 2020. - Yes.
- It came here in 2020.
- Oh, three years.
- In 2020.
- The beginning of 2020.
of 2020.
At the beginning of 2020.
It's going to be higher?
Yes, the thing is that the trees, they grow like this when they are of a very high size
for harvesting, so they do what is called "soqueo".
Soqueo is to pull the old tree, this is the branch, see?
So they let it grow back and down to lower the height again to have some new coffee trees
and great for collecting coffee.
Because when they are too tall or they break,
most of them break the cups.
When they are too tall, they pull the cup and break it.
And most of the coffee is now in the cup.
So every six or seven years,
the soqueo is made to have the new coffee beans.
what they do is what they call soqueo,
which is like cutting the older part of the fruit.
Hard prune.
Threw it back really far.
And yeah.
so they get only the younger.
- Oh.
- The frutes.
- Okay.
- You can see how tall that one is over there.
So when it gets too tall,
then there's, well, first of all,
it's hard to harvest 'cause it's so tall.
And most of the fruit is at the tips, at the top end.
So they have to prune it so that then it keep,
the growth maintains in the lower part.
- All right.
How low?
(speaking in foreign language)
Oh, so there's no...
Nothing.
Okay, let's go.
I'm just going to...
Hard stump.
Oh, I need to stump and then go back?
All right, okay.
Another one, the lung, right?
Six, seven years.
When they do those ploughs,
when they plough a traditional plough again,
it's already a very old strain.
Because when you plant the coffee,
and at six or seven years,
you do the first ploughing,
(speaking in foreign language)
and then goes back to plowing at 7 years old,
that's a 12-year-old strain.
So there's a high risk of death from plowing.
So when you do a traditional plowing,
and for example, I usually leave the lower parts of the soil.
We can see that the plowing is done from the lowest part.
The lowest part is the seed.
So what happens is that when I come back here to plow,
in three or four years,
I will be able to plow a tree of the same age.
So there is less risk of...
-Of course, of... -Of having a lot of death.
And since I use a large space,
as you can see, there is a good space,
so what I do is leave three plows per...
-Three plows. -Per site.
If I have 20,000 trees in a lot of these,
So with three sites, I'm going to have 60,000.
If I don't have 60,000, I'll have 50,000 trees.
- You'll lose money. - Yes.
And, for example, a month and a half ago we finished the harvest.
The harvest is here in October.
And this is what we call the cross-cutting.
It's in the middle of the year. This is for April, but this year it's going to be ahead of us.
Because there are many parts that are already very advanced.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
So he was saying that when they come down,
he lets three grow back so that in the space of one tree,
he has three trees.
So if he has 10,000 trees, he has 30,000 trees.
He lets three shoots come back?
Yeah.
He's also saying that usually they
did the primary harvest in October,
but their secondary harvest is usually in April.
but he thinks it's going to be a lot sooner because of the way
that the cherries are developing.
It's a lot sooner than usual.
So he was-- he understood?
He was saying--
Brenda, the other thing to note here is that--
or maybe Cecilus might interest you as well.
So this is what we talked about, where in the same plant
You have red, green, and flowers.
You have the three developmental stages
that is very hard to harvest.
- Hard to harvest.
(speaking in foreign language)
that will predominate in the coffee,
thanks to which it is exposed to pollination.
So let's say in a territory like this,
where there are many trees,
because coffee here is a shade issue,
so what happens?
Here many forest trees inhabit,
which are trees like cedar
and some fruit trees.
So here there is guava, orange, lemon, avocado.
What happens? Pollination is very exposed.
[Spanish]
Six or eight months from the flower to the grain.
He's also saying that it's really good to have other plants, other fruits around to cross pollinate.
So the these flowers so it increases like the
pollination activity
Great Spanish
Other plant, what kind of plant?
Yeah, this is what he's talking about. Banana and cedros.
Cedros is like a...
Avocados.
and the lemons
lemons?
that's guava
ah, that's guava
guava?
guava is guava
I think
this is banana
that's guava
these two are guava
and that's guamo
that's guamo
and those up there
those are the green ones
- No. - We'll see.
Those over there that don't have leaves are cedars.
But they're not dead.
Because they're seedlings.
These forest trees allow you to...
In the summer, the leaves fall off.
They create an organic layer of soil.
And that protects the tree and the soil.
So what he's saying is that they use these trees because when the summer comes and the leaves fall, they create like this ground that creates a layer in the ground and has like more nutrients, like organic nutrients.
In the winter, the trees will be flowering and with leaves.
This prevents the rain from entering the coffee plants and hurting them.
What they do is keep the area moist.
Yeah, and in the winter they have the leaves and they protect from the rain the rest of the tree so the water doesn't go directly to the tree.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
It has double protection in summer and winter.
Yes, because when the tree reaches the sun,
it's with leaves in summer,
it also helps to protect it from the sun.
So it doesn't hit it directly.
And do you notice a lot of difference
between the lots that have more shade and the ones that don't?
The truth is that a lot like this with shade
is not going to have as much production.
But let's say, if we see a lot like the one over there, where you don't notice any trees,
you don't see the front?
Yes.
What happens? That lot will have a lot of production, but only one production per year.
So what happens? It will have a production, let's say, in May.
That production is collected, and it has to wait another year.
While in this, let's say, production system, this mechanism,
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
(speaking in foreign language)
There will be production once a year, but a harvest production.
The rest of the year there will be crops to harvest.
Because the sun does not enter directly, it does not mature evenly.
And you would say that in total, closing the year, it is equal?
Yes, because in a production system like this, it will take all year.
And there will be a month where there will be a harvest.
So he was explaining that in this lot you have more shadow and they have like less production
compared to this sector that is like direct sun.
However this only has one harvest per year and this one has like the main harvest but
they keep harvesting the whole year so at the end it kind of balances.
balance is. And he's saying that even though this lot has more productivity, it's not going
[Spanish]
And he's saying that even though this lot has more production in general,
If the summer is too hard and you have too much sun,
that will affect the leaf and also the cherry at the end.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[ Foreign Language ]
[ Background noise ]
(speaking in foreign language)
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
Yes, to complement the plants.
But you also use the less nutritious ones.
Yes, the less nutritious ones.
And with a soil like this, which is so well nourished,
the quantity is very low.
I'm applying 60 grams.
60? How much would be normal?
There are people who use 140, 160.
Per plant?
Per plant.
Less than half?
Less than half, yes.
Because it's a very important saving.
Look at this soil.
Of course, I can see it.
And look, for example, at this soil here.
(whistles)
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
No, no, not good.
(speaking in foreign language)
[Spanish]
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
He went to a translation.
So he was explaining that in this part of the farm,
they mainly use organic to fertilize.
So they do use fertilizers to like a complement,
but they use less than half of what they usually need
because of all the, they use basically the plants
and they also use the cherries.
So once they de-pult the cherry,
the cascara, they put it as a ferment.
- Fertilizer.
- Under each tree?
- And so, and in this part, in contrast,
they, you can see even if you go there and touch the soil,
that that soil is richer,
it's like more humid than this one is dry.
And when they get high sun,
this soil kind of like burns out,
gets dry, and that affects the plant.
(speaking in foreign language)
[Spanish]
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
(speaking in foreign language)
In a robust coffee, they are more together.
Obviously, it will have more production, but it will lower the quality of the coffee.
Because a branch like this, with the flower, will be very thick for pollination.
So what happens? The tree will provide more nutrients to all the grains because they are fewer.
So, let's say, in a Geisha coffee, it produces even less,
it has less branches and even less.
So what happens?
It has an even greater advantage in quality over other coffees
because it can provide more nutrients to all the grains.
So he was explaining that in these kind of trees, in contrast, like for example a Robusta,
they have less density of cherry in the tree.
And if you compare this one with a Geisha, the Geisha may have even less.
So the Robusta has a greater production but lower quality, lower density and lower density
of nutrients in the seed.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
(speaking in foreign language)
(yes, the re-re is the one that collects all the grains)
(it grains all year round, that's why it's called a re-re, because it collects and collects and collects)
(but since those coffee plants maintain coffee all year round, it's very easy to control)
(because all year round it keeps graining)
(don't give it time to the broca)
(yes, because the broca suddenly reaches the green grain and it doesn't go in there because it's just water)
When it's ripe, and it attacks when the grain is dry.
That's when it reproduces.
But look, this is just harvested, and you can't find dry fruit.
It's a scatura.
You can see it very well.
They produce constantly.
The geisha produces less and takes longer, so it's an exotic coffee.
So, if it's an exotic coffee, it takes two years to produce,
the geisha takes three.
So, that tree is a very big tree, very tall,
taller than that.
So, that variety of grain produces about 4 kilos per tree.
The geisha produces 1.5 to 2 kilos.
And that's what makes it special.
Because, as I was saying, the plant is more nutritious than all the grains,
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
I got lost.
How often do you renew the plant?
For the harvest?
Let's say when the tree is 6 or 7 years old,
since it's already so tall,
for the harvest it's very difficult to harvest it
because it hurts the plant.
I have to explain that.
But the question is,
despite the harvest,
do you still end up renewing the plant a few years later?
(speaking in foreign language)
- He's asking Dan about cutting the plants all the way down.
He said every six or seven years.
And he said that he can keep a plant for 30 years or so.
And this year, the Federation recommends
they recommend to replant more frequently.
It's a new tree.
And in four years, I'll come back and plant it again.
And I'll come back and have another new tree.
When you plant it, I imagine that year the production goes down a lot, because you lose a lot of it.
I manage another system.
If you want, we can see it now.
You can even look at it from the house up.
That's why it's my system to leave three trees in one place.
If you want, we can look at it, because I never keep the farm without production.
If you want, we can look at it now.
That's why the federation doesn't recommend it.
They are my ideas, I take them out and they have given me good results.
For example, we have implemented the production by realese.
By realese? What do you mean?
like stems on each tree so that you can cut one out of three in certain section every year.
So every year some of the trees are gone and the next year they come from a different section
and the next year they come from a different section so that there's never one year that's like totally done.
He has a system. He could show us his system if we want to go out higher.
[Spanish]
I didn't get all of the nuance, but she said she does some things differently.
And he said, yeah, the whole world does things differently.
Like what works here might not work at another farm.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
I think so, yeah.
[RUSTLING]
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
Tomatoes.
Tomatoes, mm-hmm.
So he's showing that in this area,
He's the only farmer with his neighbors that has a lot more shade trees.
The rest of his neighbors are a lot more exposed.
They're a lot more...
Yeah, there's a lot more sun.
[Spanish]
Yeah, that farm over there doesn't have any shade trees.
(speaking in foreign language)
- You already have cedar.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[Spanish]
(speaking in foreign language)
(this one is dry, and they throw away the leaves)
[Spanish]
[chatter]
[ Background noise ]
[inaudible] [inaudible]
[Spanish]
These ones are about to bloom.
And those ones have already been pollen...
hopefully been pollen, but those ones have already been pollen.
It takes nitrogen out of this one.
And the banana extracts the potassium.
Do you spread the leaves that fall or let them fall naturally?
[Spanish]
Yeah, something that you'll see in a lot of the other farms.
So, two things, many things that he does really, really well.
But one is his shade, where he manages all of that drop of leaves
leaves to be able to cover the ground and then get more nitrogen back in.
So it's like a nitrogen sink.
And then his bananas are potassium sink to get back into the ground.
And because he doesn't spray, they only use like a like a weed whacker,
basically that when it rains, there's still a lot of root and very spongy
earth so that he doesn't have mudslides like a lot of the other farms.
You'll see like a big old mudslide because they spray, they kill the roots.
There's nothing holding the earth together.
So when we get our big strong rains, just washes.
How often do you go to Guadaña?
Every two or three months.
It depends.
But it takes time.
When it's rainy season, it's more frequent.
When it's summer season, it's more frequent.
How long does it take? I can see it very well now.
It takes...
two months.
Two months?
Yes, if the weather continues.
And the work for Guadaña is hard?
It must be hard to go through all the way.
The thing is that I do it with a yo-yo, not a knife.
With a yo-yo?
With a yo-yo, with a peola.
(speaking in foreign language)
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
(laughing)
(speaking in foreign language)
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
A weed whacker. It's a weed whacker but what traditionally they use here is just like a big knife. It's just spinning blades
And so what he's saying is that because he uses like the string like a like a plastic string of a weed whacker
Not only is it less dangerous than just like spinning blades, which is like the standard here
but in addition it also tends to like really kind of like liquefy like really
Like turn the the weeds
How to rip them off, right? Because it ends up pushing them.
Well, because if you have a knife and you're just cutting it you're having like one clean cut you kind of like dropping it
But he's like but this kind of like putting it in a blender
And it really destroys and it like has a longer lasting effect and it's less dangerous
I'm like, why why doesn't everybody use that like everyone I see here has the spinning blades and it's like it's so confusing
There's just like a slightly better idea. Yeah
(laughing)
(speaking in foreign language)
- Hey, girls, can we gather around?
Kayla, can you call everybody?
I'm gonna ask them for one more time.
(speaking in foreign language)
(people chattering)
(whistles)
These trees are plants that have been... they are by experiments that have been used with various plants.
Look at this one, it has the same type of leaf, but it's a big tree.
There is a variety called Catuay, which is short-leaved.
This is Catuay, but this is shorter.
(speaking in foreign language)
[Spanish]
(I've never seen one this small before)
(speaking in foreign language)
and a lot of times the bees go...
It's surprising that they are in Ano
Yes, Ano, there are varieties like that
because if we see... there we see a...
Do you know the Maragojo?
Maragojite?
Yes, do you know it? No
There is a plant there that are very tall trees
One thing Lucia, where is the other girl from...
Francy?
No, the...
- Valeria? - Yes, the Colombian ones.
- Valeria? - Yes.
Here, look, the banana...
Everything goes in this direction.
The streets go in this direction.
Because the sun comes out in that direction.
And it hides there.
So what happens? When the sun comes out, there's light all over the street.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
(speaking in foreign language)
because if we do it like this, crossed, then what happens?
In the morning, all this part here will be shaded, and in the afternoon, all this piece.
That is, one day there is no problem, but all year, all year, there will be problems.
So when there is this space like this, with the direction of the sun,
then if there is a winter season, any time now, and there it will heat the street.
(so he was explaining that the way the trees are planted is because of the of the sun the way of
the sun so they don't want to have excessive shade so the sun comes from there and goes this way so
the trees are planted that way so they have all the benefits we have been talking about about the
the leaves and the nutrients, but they don't get the effect of the over shade.
So by choosing the direction, he gets the benefit of shade trees, which is nutrition,
soil retention, but he doesn't get the drawbacks of shade trees, which is too much shade.
So by planting in a direction, he gets the positives of shade trees, and he still gets
to have a lot of sun to mature.
to maximize the solar luminosity of the year
because one day is not notary, but in the year it does affect a lot
and you can see, here it is full of bananas
but then the sun comes out there
and it will be all over the street
so there will be no problem with the coffee
and the same here, the sun comes out there
and the light will enter all over the street
of the coffee
and if we turn there, the orcs are already down
[Spanish]
(speaking in foreign language)
At midday. In the afternoon, it starts to cover the lower part.
And all year long, that's a lot.
Another thing that we have to play with is the sun, which is the most important thing for the crop.
And more than anything, for a time like the one we've been through, we've had three years of heavy rain.
And we continue with heavy rain.
(speaking in foreign language)
- So he's a very different type of farmer
from his neighbors.
No one else is putting this attention.
(speaking in foreign language)
- So this is his farm and this is a neighbor farm.
We're not in his farm.
He doesn't manage this side.
- Want to show him?
So this is just very toxic because they just only spray chemicals.
[Spanish]
She was saying the yellow leaves are lack of magnesium.
And he was like, yeah, because there's none in the soil because of all the spraying and such.
So you can see his leaves are dark green.
It's like a healthy leaf.
And a sprayed leaf.
Wow.
Neutrium.
It's because of the chemists who look at the soil.
oh
(speaking in foreign language)
(healthy, toxic)
[Laughter]
[inaudible]
I can count that one.
[foreign language]
You can see the rain is about to come to us.
It's coming.
A wall of white.
So what should we do?
Get wet?
Just get wet.
Find a big leaf.
So what's your 10 year old into?
A lot of technology.
Yeah?
Yeah, like anything Minecraft or like scratch coding type stuff.
Like he's definitely, his mother would really love it if he enjoyed the outdoors more.
- Well, you have some great outdoors near you. - We do. We force him to go out pretty soon, like he's 10 now, so like a couple more years and he'll legitimately be old enough to help with the chores of the goats and ducks and things. So he'll get to be outside and have fun. But we haven't really forced him to do too much yet.
(footsteps)
- Right next to each other,
these trees are dark green and healthy.
And just a few feet away, these are sick, skinny, diseased,
because of the management.
And they're right next to each other.
- Well, I thought my nearly 20 year old indoor tree
was not looking so great, but it doesn't look like that.
(laughing)
- Better than that one.
(speaking in foreign language)
- So this farm didn't think about that.
So the, the plátano is oriented.
The banana trees are oriented in a different direction.
So they get shade all the time.
'Cause they didn't think about where the sun was
or tracking the sun, they just planted banana trees.
(speaking in foreign language)
- All right, so he's showing how dark and rich.
60. 60 only.
Once a year?
Yes, but to help it grow.
Before...
Two months before the
seeds come out.
To help strengthen the tree for the seeds.
Because these soils
have a lot of organic matter.
Look at the root there.
Look. The coffee root.
Look at the amount of organic matter
that's there.
Very healthy, dark, moist soil.
and across the street it's dusty, dry, powder.
And he's saying they're spraying three or four times,
they're constantly spraying it.
So he's saying every time they spray,
they spray between 100, 300, 150 grams.
He's like, I spray 60 once a year
just to like give a little supplement.
- And spray the chemical.
- There's no drift over here.
Really too early is not enough to affect, obviously.
(speaking in foreign language)
- So not just this, but the neighbor up,
a little further up is completely abandoned.
They don't even do anything.
These guys are still spraying chemicals.
They're not even doing anything and they're full of pests and diseases,
but their trees are so strong here that it still manages to protect.
So they're not seeing too negative an effect by having the neighbors abandon their farms.
The tree is very similar to you. If you are malnourished, all the diseases attack you and kill you.
But if you are healthy, you receive any disease and assimilate it.
The defenses attack the disease.
A tree like this, if it gets sick, there is no problem.
If the root arrives here, look, there is very good foliage.
Look, this is the root, and it doesn't have so many problems.
[Spanish]
So he's saying he does have some, like this is roya, but because his trees are so healthy,
they're resistant enough that it doesn't like completely finish with his farm, whereas
his neighbor trees that are so sick, roya comes and just finishes them off.
[Spanish]
- If it finds dry ones? - No, it leaves.
- It goes to the neighbor. - It goes to the neighbor.
- Or it stays there.
Is it a problem of CBD?
No, that's what he's saying. He's saying because he's constantly picking and they don't leave red cherries on there,
when Broca comes, they don't have an opportunity to take hold because they don't want the green berries.
They only want the red and the overripe, the dried ones.
But if you have the farm that abandoned nearby...
Yeah, but they still don't have anywhere to come.
They don't have anywhere to come.
Even if everyone else has Broca and he only has green cherries,
They're not gonna bother with his green cherries. They're gonna go somewhere else to look for the red ones
Yo, otra cosa por ejemplo como como yo no utilizo químicos
entonces el control biológico está ahí
Que come la broca
Hay mucho insetos. Hay un hongo. Hay una vispita. Hay mucha araña
Que usted encuentra por ahí telarañas que encuentran en los árboles. Todo eso va caturando brocas
aquí como humigan
So they kill the biological control.
So they throw the plague.
Yes.
So, that is a living animal.
If it knows that I go there and they eat me or kill me,
then I don't go.
That's like a bat.
If the bat is there and nobody bothers it, it stays there.
But if you start to bother it, it leaves.
It's an animal.
Or it feels poison here and it smells, it leaves.
I'm smarter than you.
So his neighbor has broca?
Yeah.
Right now, still have broca?
Mm-hmm.
But it's not come to here?
It's not coming here.
He said that there's other-- he maintains the biodiversity,
so there are other things that eat the broca in his farm,
because there are other spiders and bugs and things that--
Wasps and other things, yeah.
--that take it out.
But on that farm, because they spray so many chemicals,
the biodiversity is destroyed.
So the broca can just come on in and do whatever it wants.
- East however wants.
- Oh yeah, but in Thailand, it just come here.
- Yeah.
- Oh, it's--
- I think, yeah, that's what Lucy was saying.
- You can protect with this kind of--
- He picks so frequently and he maintains the,
like he doesn't keep any overripe.
That there isn't anywhere for them to even eat
if they went over there.
Like they'd cross the street and then be like,
there's nothing to eat.
- Oh, it's closed.
- I'm not gonna go back.
Yeah, this restaurant's closed, I'm going back over there.
- Mm, nice.
- Yes, they are. - Yes, they are.
They are already picking them.
- Question for Humberto? - Can I fly over it?
- Question? - No.
- There are a lot of them in this park.
- Will we survive?
- We found one.
- We found a roca.
- We got it.
- He said he was going to take some to Jamaica.
- To spread the love.
(they're mixing and everything) ah yeah it's beautiful
[CHATTER]
So Brandon, this is what we were talking about,
where the dry and there's organic matter.
And it's just like soft topsoil.
It just washes--
It's not going to be a problem.
It's going to be a problem.
(phone ringing)
Like this?
Like the manual way to get out.
Ok.
You ok?
So sleepy.
Yeah, that part is sleepy.
(people talking)
[BLANK_AUDIO]
[wind]
[INAUDIBLE]
[ Inaudible ]
but you have never tried with the BMP?
No
You also have an IKAWA, right?
Yes
[ Inaudible ]
How has been your experience?
[ Background noise ]
(this is the famous visual of the exhaust and the smoke)
uh-huh
(indistinct chatter)
[INAUDIBLE]
[ Background noise ]
and you smell like
(camera shutters clicking)
(chattering)
[INAUDIBLE]
[inaudible]
[ Background noise ]
[Spanish]
[indistinct chatter]
[inaudible]
[ Indistinct conversations ]
[ Background noise ]
It's fun, it's really, it's like a wild beast.
You have to control it.
I mean, you get used to it, you're going to get really hungry.
I have to film the great roast meat, but it's not like the roast meat you just have for example.
It's a bit more gruesome.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
[outhentlic chatter]
[INAUDIBLE]
[ Background noise ]
[inaudible]
It's a barranquero. That's the bird that was in the next kiosk in the living room. I don't know if you saw it. It has a really long tail. It has two pins. So there's a long tail and at the bottom there's two rods. And at the bottom of each rod there's a big teardrop feather. And it sits on a tree and dances like a clock. It spins its tail back and forth.
and the whole thing is like bright blue with a green head.
Gorgeous bird.
With the back and forth like that.
(speaking in foreign language)
Bird call.
It's a really beautiful bird.
(speaking in foreign language)
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[INAUDIBLE]
[Inaudible]
(speaking in foreign language)
(footsteps)
[footsteps]
(footsteps crunching)
That is amusing to feelings.
I mean the side by side comparison is kind of cool.
Yeah, it's pretty like stark.
This is a geisha's lot.
It's about to come into the back of my mind.
Yeah, teaching how different the shape is, just how like, kind of like a wine cup.
[Spanish]
And very long internodes.
Internodes meaning like where they come from?
No, internodes of like the branches of like the fruit points.
[Spanish]
You mean between the fruit points or?
Between the fruit points.
[Spanish]
14 months.
so you can see something like this the information is tight and that really makes it have a longer space.
[INAUDIBLE]
Yeah, they're all shooting points.
Really?
[INAUDIBLE]
Still recovering from the thrashing.
It was shot with a camera
Did you get a picture?
Yeah
Oh wait, it's not that bad
It's not as bad as the one we got with you
Okay
It goes inside of the cherry.
[Spanish]
Smaller the ant.
The smaller is like an ant and the bigger is like a...
[Laughter]
[Indistinct chatter]
[wind]
[INAUDIBLE]
Yeah, it's a very good place.
(people speaking in foreign language)
(thunder rumbling)
(man laughing)
(wind howling)
[wind]
(speaking in foreign language)
[footsteps]
[FOOTSTEPS]
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[children playing]
[ Background noise ]
Oh
Oh, the phone? Oh yeah, I got the phone.
I'm using one of those things out there.
They're pretty big.
They're bigger than mine.
Oh, you have some?
Yeah, I've got a third.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
(cheering)